Add 0.3 upgrade guide (#454)
holochain/docs-pages: src/pages/upgrade/upgrade-holochain-0.3.md

or follow the recommended format as described in [Dev Tools Setup](../install-advanced).
!!!

#### Update your `flake.nix` using a command

In the root folder of the hApp to be upgraded execute the following command in a terminal:

```shell
nix run nixpkgs#gnused -- -i 's/dir=versions\/0_2/dir=versions\/0_3/g' flake.nix
```

#### Update your `flake.nix` manually

Alternatively open `flake.nix` in an editor. It should look like this:

```nix
{
  description = "My hApp";

  inputs = {
    nixpkgs.follows = "holonix/nixpkgs";
    versions.url = "github:holochain/holochain?dir=versions/0_2";
    holonix.url = "github:holochain/holochain";
    holonix.inputs.versions.follows = "versions";
  };
  
  ...
}
```

Change this line

```nix
versions.url = "github:holochain/holochain?dir=versions/0_2";
```

to

```nix
versions.url = "github:holochain/holochain?dir=versions/0_3";
```

#### Apply the update

Updating the `flake.nix` won't make Nix use the new Holochain version when you next open a dev shell with `nix develop`. For the changes
to take effect you need to run:

```shell
nix flake update
```

!!! note

> This takes all updates from Holonix, possibly including an update to the Rust version that Holonix is currently using. 

Reviewer: Ah, you meant so that all crates can be pulled from the cache.

Author: Well it can't fetch Cargo deps from the cache pre-built, but it will mean that your CI won't start rebuilding all of Holochain on every run. So it saves downloading and building all of Holochain's deps to assemble the binary to test against yes

Author: Same thing if you switch machine or clear your Nix cache, you'll be able to fetch what you need rather than spending 45 minutes compiling everything again. Which is probably on the low end, it takes a couple of hours on a laptop.

Reviewer 2: laptop over here 👋🏼  even just compiling `hc-scaffold` takes a few hours, but you will not wrest my 7yo ThinkPad from my grasp!

Author: It's weird with computers, I love mine until something much faster comes along then suddenly all my feelings transfer to the faster machine :D

```

##### HDK: `remote_signal` function renamed

Most HDK functions follow the naming pattern `verb[_target]`. The `remote_signal` function was renamed to `send_remote_signal` to follow this pattern
and make it clearer what the function does. The changelog entry for this change is [here](https://github.com/holochain/holochain/blob/develop-0.3/CHANGELOG.md#hdk-030-beta-dev23).

##### HDK: `GetOptions` rework

The `GetOptions` enum used to have `Content` and `Latest` variants. The meaning of these weren't clear and they were not 
consistently implemented. The `Content` variant was renamed to `Local` and using it will request that data lookups are 
done using local data only. The `Latest` variant was renamed to `Network` and allows Holochain to choose to go to the 
network to fetch data if required. The changelog entry for this change is [here](https://github.com/holochain/holochain/blob/develop-0.3/CHANGELOG.md#holochain_zome_types-030-beta-dev29).

You're looking for code like:
```rust
get(r.action().entry_hash().unwrap().clone(), GetOptions::content())?;
```

Which should be updated to:
```rust
get(r.action().entry_hash().unwrap().clone(), GetOptions::network())?;
```

> The `Local` variant is intended to support a local first app which is willing to operate with the currently available data.

Author: I wasn't that keen on the use of 'stale' here, so I tweaked this a bit. I think stale  depends on context. Using 2005's market data for trading in 2024 would be a serious case of stale data. Choosing to work offline and syncing with other people when you next have a network connection to them could be a choice. It could be a requirement though, if you live somewhere with an unreliable connection or use mobile data during the day which is expensive to sync over. To me these aren't always about stale data, it's more about having the flexibility to use your data without connectivity.

#### General advice for upgrading

It's likely that you will need to make more changes than have been mentioned above, but hopefully this guide has given you a head start! Here are some other things to look out for in this upgrade:
- There have been significant changes to Holochain's data validation. You may see validation failures that you didn't see before upgrading. Our experience of helping people upgrade to dev versions of 0.3 is that these are often due to issues in your app's validation logic. 

>   Please check your validation logic and check whether there might be an issue there. If not, then please reach out on Discord or open a [Github issue](https://github.com/holochain/holochain/issues/new/choose) for help.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Please check your validation logic and check whether there might be an issue there. If not, then please reach out on [Discord](https://discord.gg/E3EXyPBj3F) or open a [Github issue](https://github.com/holochain/holochain/issues/new/choose) for help.
```

> - There have been changes to the data structures provided for app validation. This means that you will need to update your validation code to remove some fields that are no longer available. You should check the changelog [here](https://github.com/holochain/holochain/blob/develop-0.3/CHANGELOG.md#hdi-040-beta-dev36).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* There have been changes to the data structures provided for app validation. This means that you will need to update your validation code to remove some fields that are no longer available. You should check the changelog [here](https://github.com/holochain/holochain/blob/develop-0.3/CHANGELOG.md#hdi-040-beta-dev36).
```

>   If you need to retain the fields that have been removed for your validation logic, then your best option is probably to scaffold an app for 0.3 and take a look at the validation code that is generated.

Reviewer 2: What would be the outcome of this recommendation? FWIU the changes are mainly that previous-action/entry deps for CRUD ops aren't fetched, and instead you're just given a hash. Can we say something about that here?

Author: The way the scaffolding was updated, it effectively maintains the existing way of doing things. That means that getting back the removed data can be achieved by merging in logic from the scaffolded `lib.rs` in the generated integrity zome.

I think the changelog describes this better than I can. Do we want to move something from the changelog to here or is linking to it enough?

Reviewer 2: how about something like this for the last sentence? "scaffold an app for 0.3 and take a look at _how its validation code retrieves the data that's no longer part of the data structures._"

  You can do this by running `nix run --override-input versions "github:holochain/holochain?dir=versions/0_3" github:holochain/holochain#hc-scaffold`.

> - There have been significant app interface changes for Holochain 0.3. There is a changelog entry [here](https://github.com/holochain/holochain/blob/develop-0.3/CHANGELOG.md#holochain-030-beta-dev47). Most problems will be taken care of by picking

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* There have been significant WebSocket app interface changes for Holochain 0.3. There is a changelog entry [here](https://github.com/holochain/holochain/blob/develop-0.3/CHANGELOG.md#holochain-030-beta-dev47). Most problems will be taken care of by picking
```

>   the right client versions and following any changes that are required to use the new client. However, if you are integrating with Holochain's app websocket directly or maintaining your own client then you should get in touch if you run into any difficulties upgrading.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  the right client versions and following any changes that are required to use the new client. However, if you are integrating with Holochain's app interface directly or maintaining your own client then you should get in touch if you run into any difficulties upgrading.
```

> - Databases up to 0.3 have been unencrypted by default. From 0.3 onwards, databases are always encrypted by default. You can disable this by building Holochain with different options if you need to, or we can show you how to open the encrypted databases if you need.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Databases prior to 0.3 have been unencrypted by default. From 0.3 onwards, databases are always encrypted by default. You can disable this by building Holochain with different options if you need to, or we can show you how to open the encrypted databases.
```

>   For now, we are assuming that people don't often need to do this so there is no guide. If this assumption turns out to be wrong, we can create a guide for this!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  For now, we are assuming that people don't often need to do this, so there is no guide. If this assumption turns out to be wrong, we can create one!
```

> - A change was made to help hApp developers spot mistakes in DNA manifests that might catch you out if you have extra fields or old fields in your DNA manifest. You can read about this change [here](https://github.com/holochain/holochain/blob/develop-0.3/CHANGELOG.md#holochain_types-030-beta-dev24).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A change was made to help hApp developers spot mistakes in DNA manifests that might catch you out if they contain extra fields or obsolete fields. You can read about this change [here](https://github.com/holochain/holochain/blob/develop-0.3/CHANGELOG.md#holochain_types-030-beta-dev24).
```

> - Holochain 0.2 and 0.3 are not network compatible. That means that if you have users of you hApp still running Holochain 0.2, then even with the same DNA hash, they would not be able to connect to users running Holochain 0.3.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Holochain 0.2 and 0.3 are not network-compatible. That means that if you have users of your hApp still running Holochain 0.2, then even with the same DNA hash, they would not be able to connect to users running Holochain 0.3.
```

  The changes between 0.2 and 0.3 are not as significant as they were between 0.1 and 0.2, but they still prevent communication between the two versions.

> ### Next steps

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Next steps
```

> You should check that your project builds, tests are passing and that anything else your CI will check is working. You should also check that your hApp is still working because static checks and tests might not catch changes that are required in your UI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You should check that your project builds, tests are passing, and that anything else your CI will check is working. You should also check that your hApp is still working because static checks and tests might not catch changes that are required in your UI.
```

For general project health, you should check if any other dependencies in your project need an update. Please refer to NPM and Cargo documentation for this.

> That should be everything, you can now develop against Holochain 0.3! Good luck, and if you need help then please do get in touch on Discord or open a [Github issue](https://github.com/holochain/holochain/issues/new/choose).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That should be everything --- you can now develop against Holochain 0.3! Good luck, and once again, if you need help then please do get in touch on [Discord](https://discord.gg/E3EXyPBj3F) or open a [Github issue](https://github.com/holochain/holochain/issues/new/choose).
```
